Now that we've identified where incident response
falls into the contingency planning process,
let's dig into that more.
Now, the incident response process has several phases.
Those phases are preparation, detection and analysis,
containment, eradication and recovery,
and finally, post incident activity.
The first phase, preparation,
involves building and training an incident response team.
It also includes gathering the right tools and
resources to adequately respond to incidents.
During preparation, the organization works to mitigate risk and
reduce the number of incidents that may occur by implementing security controls as well.
Either way, some residual risk will continue to exist after controls are implemented,
which is why incident response preparation is so important.
Being able to detect and analyze incidence,
which is the next phase,
is a necessary step in order to fully understand
the incident and alert the appropriate context whenever the incident occurs.
This step is critical because in reality,
it can take companies days, months,
and sometimes years to detect an incident.
Based on the severity of the incident,
the organization can mitigate impact by
containing and addressing the incident and ultimately recovering from it.
During this phase, sometimes it creates a loop
between containment and detection and analysis.
For example, with the way malware can spread quickly,
you may find that as you remove it and work to recover in one area,
it gets discovered in another and the process starts again.
After the incident is contained and recovery is well underway or complete,
the organization creates reports that include
information on the cause and financial impact of the incident,
as well as lessons learned and steps the company can take to avoid future incidence.
The entire incident response life cycle requires support and input
from various key players within an organization to make it work effectively.
There's usually a dedicated incident response team
that includes representatives from various groups.
The main planning in orchestration responsibility
typically lies with the cyber security staff.
These are the people, for example,
who manage the cyber security incident detection technology and other resources.
The management team establishes incident response policy,
budget and staffing, which are fundamental pieces in the incident response team process.
Next, IT support may also be needed during certain stages of incident handling.
For example, to change firewall rules in the middle of an incident.
Also, legal experts can help,
especially in an incident where there might be legal ramifications,
including evidence collection, prosecution of a suspect or other matters.
Digital forensics experts are also another element here,
and we'll talk about that a little more later.
Next, depending on the magnitude and impact of the incident,
you might need public affairs and media relations resources
to inform the media and by extension, the public.
You could also need HR involvement if, for example,
you're dealing with a malicious insider who needs
to be reprimanded or potentially terminated.
The list goes on and on.
But the bottom line is that when you're dealing with incident response,
it truly takes a village.
The incident response life cycle can require
support from people outside of the organization as well,
such as law enforcement agencies,
Internet service providers, support vendors and more.
For example, if you're experiencing a denial of
service incident where you are being flooded with fake traffic,
you may contact your Internet service provider to
block that traffic and slow or stop the incident.
Another example, if you're dealing with a cyber terrorist,
you may need to get law enforcement or the FBI involved.
Or if you're dealing with a zero-day exploit,
you may work with your vendor or your support team to address the issue.
The last example I'll share is that there are
trusted information sharing organizations that
incident response teams participate in so that they can learn from
each other about the latest attack attempts and trends.
The incident response team should document all of this contact information and all of
these exchanges with external parties to make sure that you're
covered from a liability standpoint and also as evidence.